AJ-11: add initial content from discussion thread (#22)
nhsbsa-data-analytics/nhsbsa-analytical-code-assurance-playbook: guidance/01-reproducible/pages/03-modular.qmd

---
title: "Modular"
description: ""
---

> ### Pre-requisite reading
>
> * [AF Duck book: Modular code][duck-book]
> * [NHSBSA DDaT playbook: Development - Coding][ddat-playbook]

## What is modular code?
Complex analysis projects and workflows can often lead to a lot of code being written with some or a lot of that code performing repetitive tasks. 
Breaking down your code and workflow into smaller reusable chunks to can help you maintain your project and share components across a series of analyses. 

> Tools such as R, Python, SQL, and Alteryx provide methods to create containerised code such as modules, classes, functions and macros.

Author: Would avoid the word 'containerised' due to dual meaning.

```suggestion
Languages such as R, Python and SQL, and workflow tools like Alteryx provide ways to break up code into smaller logical units, including modules, classes, functions and macros.
```

> ## What is modular code?
> Complex analysis projects and workflows can often lead to a lot of code being written with some or a lot of that code performing repetitive tasks. 
> Breaking down your code and workflow into smaller reusable chunks to can help you maintain your project and share components across a series of analyses. 
> Tools such as R, Python, SQL, and Alteryx provide methods to create containerised code such as modules, classes, functions and macros.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What is modular code?
* Complex analysis projects and workflows can often lead to a lot of code being written with some or a lot of that code performing repetitive tasks. 
* Breaking down your code and workflow into smaller, independent, reusable chunks (modules) can help you maintain your project and share components across a series of analyses.
* Each module ideally handles a specific task (separation of concerns) and interacts with others through well-defined interfaces, hiding its internal complexity.
* Languages such as R, Python and SQL, and workflow tools like Alteryx provide ways to break up code into smaller logical units, including modules, classes, functions and macros.
```

> ## What is modular code?
> Complex analysis projects and workflows can often lead to a lot of code being written with some or a lot of that code performing repetitive tasks. 
> Breaking down your code and workflow into smaller reusable chunks to can help you maintain your project and share components across a series of analyses. 
> Tools such as R, Python, SQL, and Alteryx provide methods to create containerised code such as modules, classes, functions and macros.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What is modular code?
* Complex analysis projects and workflows can often lead to a lot of code being written with some or a lot of that code performing repetitive tasks. 
* Breaking down your code and workflow into smaller, independent, reusable chunks (modules) can help you maintain your project and share components across a series of analyses. 
* Each module ideally handles a specific task (separation of concerns) and interacts with others through well-defined interfaces, hiding its internal complexity.
* Tools such as R, Python, SQL, and Alteryx provide methods to create containerised code such as modules, classes, functions and macros.
```

## Why should I do this?
Writing your code in a modular way provides a range of benefits:

> * prevents long, complex walls of code that are hard to understand
> * makes sharing code with others (and your future self) easier
> * speeds up the peer review process 
> * makes testing of the code (and its outputs) easier

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* promotes [readability][readable-code] by preventing long, complex walls of code that are hard to understand
* multiple team members working on same codebase will have less code conflicts
* simplifies testing of the code (and its outputs)
* smaller modules are easier to maintain or improve in future
* speeds up the [peer review][peer-review] process 
* makes sharing and reusing code easier
```

## How do we do it then?
Writing modular code or developing modular workflows can differ depending on the your tool of choice, the needs of the project or piece of work, the intended customer, or the expected users of the code in the future. 
However, a simple hierarchy of actions to take are:

* split complex code and workflows in multiple (ordered) scripts or smaller workflows

> * use a code notebook to organise your analysis

Reviewer: I am a fan of notebooks for organising a flow of work, in tandem with modular code defined outside the notebook.

> * use a code notebook to organise your analysis

Author: Cool. Will resolve this but have added a ticket https://github.com/nhsbsa-data-analytics/nhsbsa-analytical-code-assurance-playbook/issues/38

Using scripts doesn't inherently make your code reproducible or reusable, but are a good first step towards better and higher quality code.

**Do**

* split your code up
* group related code together
* organise your scripts so you and others know how to run it
* make your scripts self contained and be able to ran from a command line

**Don't**

* write monolithic code
* split up your code too much - 100 scripts with 10 lines of code in are just as hard to digest
* write overly complex code where simpler solutions might exist

### Use a code notebook
Services such as Jupyter notebooks or R Markdown allow you write code, commentary and visualisations alongside each other. 
They can be incredibly useful, and individual workbooks can be a good first step towards modularising your code for simple projects and workflows and for doing initial data exploration. 
However, they can be difficult to use with further practices for producing high quality code. For example:

* they are inherently difficult to review and audit using version control
* code cells can be ran out of order, reducing reproducibility

> * not easy to test functions written in the notebook

Reviewer: @alistair-jones I'd find it useful to get your feedback on how I have used Rmarkdown notebooks for the eRD project. I think I have avoided the pitfalls here. They could be an example of the right way to use notebooks as per the draft note above.

Languages such as R, Python and SQL, and workflow tools like Alteryx provide ways to break up code into smaller logical units, including modules, classes, functions and macros.

## Why should I do this?
Writing your code in a modular way provides a range of benefits:

* promotes [readability][readable-code] by preventing long, complex walls of code that are hard to understand
* multiple team members working on same codebase will have less code conflicts
* simplifies testing of the code (and its outputs)
* smaller modules are easier to maintain or improve in future
* speeds up the [peer review][peer-review] process 
* makes sharing and reusing code easier

## How do we do it then?
Writing modular code or developing modular workflows can differ depending on the your tool of choice, the needs of the project or piece of work, the intended customer, or the expected users of the code in the future. 
However, a simple hierarchy of actions to take are:

* split complex code and workflows in multiple (ordered) scripts or smaller workflows
* use a code notebook to organise your analysis
* write re-usable code as functions
* organise related functions into modules

> * organise and document modules as packages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* organise and document modules as packages
* starting from 'monolithic' code and refactoring over time is a valid strategy!
```
